Page semi-protected
Listen to this article
Attack on Pearl Harbor
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Attack on Pearl Harbor
Part of the Pacific Theater of World War II
Attack on Pearl Harbor Japanese planes view.jpg
Photograph of Battleship Row taken from a Japanese plane at the beginning of the attack. The explosion in the center is a torpedo strike on the USS West Virginia. Two attacking Japanese planes can be seen: one over the USS Neosho and one over the Naval Yard.
Date  December 7, 1941
Location  Primarily Pearl Harbor, Hawaii Territory, U.S.
Result  
Japanese major tactical victory
U.S. declaration of war on the Empire of Japan.
Germany and Italy declare war on the United States.
Entrance of the United States of America into the war
Belligerents
 United States of America    Empire of Japan
Commanders and leaders
 Husband Kimmel
 Walter Short  Chuichi Nagumo
 Isoroku Yamamoto
Strength
8 battleships
8 cruisers
30 destroyers
4 submarines
1 USCG Cutter[nb 1]
49 other ships[1]
≈390 aircraft Mobile Unit:
6 aircraft carriers
2 battleships
2 heavy cruisers
1 light cruiser
9 destroyers
8 tankers
23 fleet submarines
5 midget submarines
414 aircraft
Casualties and losses
2 battleships totally lost
2 battleships sunk and recovered
3 battleships damaged
1 battleship grounded
2 other ships sunk[nb 2]
3 cruisers damaged[nb 3]
3 destroyers damaged
3 other ships damaged
188 aircraft destroyed
159[3] aircraft damaged
2,403 killed
1,178 wounded[4][5] 4 midget submarines sunk
1 midget submarine grounded
29 aircraft destroyed
64 killed
1 captured[6]
Civilian casualties
68 killed[7][8]
35 wounded[4]
The attack on Pearl Harbor[nb 4] was a surprise military strike conducted by the Imperial Japanese Navy against the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on the morning of December 7, 1941 (December 8 in Japan). The attack led to the United States' entry into World War II.

The attack was intended as a preventive action in order to keep the U.S. Pacific Fleet from interfering with military actions the Empire of Japan was planning in Southeast Asia against overseas territories of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and the United States. There were simultaneous Japanese attacks on the U.S.-held Philippines and on the British Empire in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong.

From the standpoint of the defenders, the attack commenced at 7:48 a.m. Hawaiian Time.[13] The base was attacked by 353[14] Japanese fighter planes, bombers, and torpedo planes in two waves, launched from six aircraft carriers.[14] All eight U.S. Navy battleships were damaged, with four being sunk. All but one (Arizona) were later raised, and six of the eight battleships were returned to service and went on to fight in the war. The Japanese also sank or damaged three cruisers, three destroyers, an anti-aircraft training ship,[nb 5] and one minelayer. 188 U.S. aircraft were destroyed; 2,403 Americans were killed and 1,178 others were wounded.[16] Important base installations such as the power station, shipyard, maintenance, and fuel and torpedo storage facilities, as well as the submarine piers and headquarters building (also home of the intelligence section) were not attacked. Japanese losses were light: 29 aircraft and five midget submarines lost, and 65 servicemen killed or wounded. One Japanese sailor, Kazuo Sakamaki, was captured.

The attack came as a profound shock to the American people and led directly to the American entry into World War II in both the Pacific and European theaters. The following day, December 8, the United States declared war on Japan.[17] Domestic support for non-interventionism, which had been strong,[18] disappeared. Clandestine support of Britain (e.g., the Neutrality Patrol) was replaced by active alliance. Subsequent operations by the U.S. prompted Germany and Italy to declare war on the U.S. on December 11, which was reciprocated by the U.S. the same day.

Years later several writers alleged that parties high in the U.S. and British governments knew of the attack in advance and may have let it happen (or even encouraged it) with the aim of bringing America into war.[19][20] However, this advance-knowledge conspiracy theory is rejected by mainstream historians.[21][nb 6]

There were numerous historical precedents for unannounced military action by Japan. However, the lack of any formal warning, particularly while negotiations were still apparently ongoing, led President Franklin D. Roosevelt to proclaim December 7, 1941, "a date which will live in infamy". Because the attack happened without a declaration of war and without explicit warning, the attack on Pearl Harbor was judged by the Tokyo Trials to be a war crime.[23][24]

Contents

1 Background to conflict
1.1 Diplomatic background
1.2 Military planning
1.3 Objectives
2 Approach and attack
2.1 Submarines
2.2 Japanese declaration of war
2.3 First wave composition
2.4 Second wave composition
2.5 American casualties and damages
2.6 Japanese losses
2.7 Possible third wave
3 Photographs
4 Ships lost or damaged
4.1 Battleships
4.2 Ex-battleship (target/AA training ship)
4.3 Cruisers
4.4 Destroyers
4.5 Auxiliaries
5 Salvage
6 Aftermath
6.1 Niihau Incident
6.2 Strategic implications
6.3 Present day
7 Media
7.1 Non-fiction/historical
7.2 Alternate history
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
10.1 Bibliography
11 Further reading
12 External links
Background to conflict


Pearl Harbor on October 30, 1941, looking southwest
Diplomatic background

The attack on Pearl Harbor was intended to neutralize the U.S. Pacific Fleet, and hence protect Japan's advance into Malaya and the Dutch East Indies, where it sought access to natural resources such as oil and rubber.[3] War between Japan and the United States had been a possibility of which each nation had been aware (and developed contingency plans for) since the 1920s, though tensions did not begin to grow seriously until Japan's 1931 invasion of Manchuria. Over the next decade, Japan continued to expand into China, leading to all-out war between those countries in 1937. Japan spent considerable effort trying to isolate China and achieve sufficient resource independence to attain victory on the mainland; the "Southern Operation" was designed to assist these efforts.[25]

From December 1937, events such as the Japanese attack on the USS Panay, the Allison incident, and the Nanking Massacre (the International Military Tribunal of the Far East concluded that more than 200,000 Chinese non-combatants were killed in indiscriminate massacres, though other estimates have ranged from 40,000 to more than 300,000) swung public opinion in the West sharply against Japan. Fearing Japanese expansion,[26] the United States, the United Kingdom, and France provided loan assistance for war supply contracts to the Republic of China.

In 1940, Japan invaded French Indochina in an effort to control supplies reaching China. The United States halted shipments of airplanes, parts, machine tools, and aviation gasoline to Japan, which was perceived by Japan as an unfriendly act.[nb 7] The U.S. did not stop oil exports to Japan at that time in part because prevailing sentiment in Washington was that such an action would be an extreme step, given Japanese dependence on U.S. oil,[28][29] and likely to be considered a provocation by Japan.

Early in 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt moved the Pacific Fleet to Hawaii from its previous base in San Diego and ordered a military buildup in the Philippines in the hope of discouraging Japanese aggression in the Far East. Because the Japanese high command was (mistakenly) certain that any attack on Britain's Southeast Asian colonies would bring the U.S. into war, a devastating preventive strike appeared to be the only way to avoid U.S. naval interference.[30] An invasion of the Philippines was also considered necessary by Japanese war planners. The U.S. War Plan Orange had envisioned defending the Philippines with a 40,000-man elite force. This was opposed by Douglas MacArthur, who felt that he would need a force ten times that size, and was never implemented.[31] By 1941, U.S. planners anticipated abandonment of the Philippines at the outbreak of war and orders to that effect were given in late 1941 to Admiral Thomas Hart, commander of the Asiatic Fleet.[32]

The U.S. ceased oil exports to Japan in July 1941, following Japanese expansion into French Indochina after the fall of France, in part because of new American restrictions on domestic oil consumption.[33] This in turn caused the Japanese to proceed with plans to take the Dutch East Indies, an oil-rich territory.[nb 8] On 17 August, Roosevelt warned Japan that the U.S. was prepared to take steps against Japan if it attacked "neighboring countries".[35] The Japanese were faced with the option of either withdrawing from China and losing face or seizing and securing new sources of raw materials in the resource-rich, European-controlled colonies of Southeast Asia.

Japan and the U.S. engaged in negotiations during the course of 1941 in an effort to improve relations. During these negotiations, Japan offered to withdraw from most of China and Indochina when peace was made with the Nationalist government, adopt an independent interpretation of the Tripartite Pact, and not to discriminate in trade provided all other countries reciprocated. Washington rejected these proposals. Japanese Prime Minister Konoye then offered to personally meet with Roosevelt, but Roosevelt insisted on coming to an agreement before any meeting.[36] The U.S. ambassador to Japan repeatedly urged Roosevelt to accept the meeting, warning that it was the only way to preserve the conciliatory Konoye government and peace in the Pacific.[37] His recommendation was not acted upon. The Konoye government collapsed the following month when the Japanese military refused to agree to the withdrawal of all troops from China.[38]

Japan's final proposal, on 20 November, offered to withdraw their forces from southern Indochina and not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia provided that the U.S., Britain, and the Netherlands ceased aiding China and lifted their sanctions against Japan.[38] The American counter-proposal of 26 November (November 27 in Japan) (the Hull note) required Japan to evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with Pacific powers. However the day before the Hull Note was delivered, on November 26 in Japan, the main Japanese attack fleet left port for Pearl Harbor.

Military planning

Preliminary planning for an attack on Pearl Harbor to protect the move into the "Southern Resource Area" (the Japanese term for the Dutch East Indies and Southeast Asia generally) had begun very early in 1941 under the auspices of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, then commanding Japan's Combined Fleet.[39] He won assent to formal planning and training for an attack from the Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff only after much contention with Naval Headquarters, including a threat to resign his command.[40] Full-scale planning was underway by early spring 1941, primarily by Rear Admiral Ryunosuke Kusaka, with assistance from Captain Minoru Genda and Yamamoto's Deputy Chief of Staff, Captain Kameto Kuroshima.[41] The planners studied the 1940 British air attack on the Italian fleet at Taranto intensively.[nb 9][nb 10]

Over the next several months, pilots trained, equipment was adapted, and intelligence collected. Despite these preparations, Emperor Hirohito did not approve the attack plan until November 5, after the third of four Imperial Conferences called to consider the matter.[44] Final authorization was not given by the emperor until December 1, after a majority of Japanese leaders advised him the "Hull Note" would "destroy the fruits of the China incident, endanger Manchukuo and undermine Japanese control of Korea."[45]

By late 1941, many observers believed that hostilities between the U.S. and Japan were imminent. A Gallup poll just before the attack on Pearl Harbor found that 52% of Americans expected war with Japan, 27% did not, and 21% had no opinion.[46] While U.S. Pacific bases and facilities had been placed on alert on many occasions, U.S. officials doubted Pearl Harbor would be the first target; instead, they expected the Philippines would be attacked first. This presumption was due to the threat that the air bases throughout the country and the naval base at Manila posed to sea lanes, as well as to the shipment of supplies to Japan from territory to the south.[47] They also incorrectly believed that Japan was not capable of mounting more than one major naval operation at a time.[48]

Ever since the Japanese attack, there has been debate as to how and why the United States had been caught unaware, and how much and when American officials knew of Japanese plans and related topics. Several writers, including journalist Robert Stinnett and former United States rear admiral Robert Alfred Theobald, have argued that various parties high in the U.S. and British governments knew of the attack in advance and may even have let it happen or encouraged it in order to force America into war via the so-called "back door." However, this Pearl Harbor advance-knowledge conspiracy theory is rejected by mainstream historians.[49][50][51]

Objectives

The attack had several major aims. First, it intended to destroy important American fleet units, thereby preventing the Pacific Fleet from interfering with Japanese conquest of the Dutch East Indies and Malaya. Second, it was hoped to buy time for Japan to consolidate its position and increase its naval strength before shipbuilding authorized by the 1940 Vinson-Walsh Act erased any chance of victory.[52][53] Finally, it was meant to deliver a severe blow to American morale, one which would discourage Americans from committing to a war extending into the western Pacific Ocean and Dutch East Indies. To maximize the effect on morale, battleships were chosen as the main targets, since they were the prestige ships of any navy at the time. The overall intention was to enable Japan to conquer Southeast Asia without interference.[52]

Striking the Pacific Fleet at anchor in Pearl Harbor carried two distinct disadvantages: the targeted ships would be in very shallow water, so it would be relatively easy to salvage and possibly repair them; and most of the crews would survive the attack, since many would be on shore leave or would be rescued from the harbor. A further important disadvantage—this of timing, and known to the Japanese—was the absence from Pearl Harbor of all three of the U.S. Pacific Fleet's aircraft carriers (Enterprise, Lexington, and Saratoga). IJN top command was so imbued with Admiral Mahan's "decisive battle" doctrine—especially that of destroying the maximum number of battleships—that, despite these concerns, Yamamoto decided to press ahead.
Japanese confidence in their ability to achieve a short, victorious war also meant other targets in the harbor, especially the navy yard, oil tank farms, and submarine base, were ignored, since—by their thinking—the war would be over before the influence of these facilities would be felt.[54]

Approach and attack


Route followed by the Japanese fleet to Pearl Harbor and back.

An Imperial Japanese Navy Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter on the aircraft carrier Akagi.
On November 26, 1941, a Japanese task force (the Striking Force) of six aircraft carriers—Akagi, Kaga, Sōryū, Hiryū, Shōkaku, and Zuikaku—departed northern Japan en route to a position northwest of Hawaii, intending to launch its 408 aircraft to attack Pearl Harbor: 360 for the two attack waves and 48 on defensive combat air patrol (CAP), including nine fighters from the first wave.

The first wave was to be the primary attack, while the second wave was to attack carriers as its first objective and cruisers as its second, with battleships as the third target.[55] The first wave carried most of the weapons to attack capital ships, mainly specially adapted Type 91 aerial torpedoes which were designed with an anti-roll mechanism and a rudder extension that let them operate in shallow water.[56] The aircrews were ordered to select the highest value targets (battleships and aircraft carriers) or, if these were not present, any other high value ships (cruisers and destroyers). First wave dive bombers were to attack ground targets. Fighters were ordered to strafe and destroy as many parked aircraft as possible to ensure they did not get into the air to intercept the bombers, especially in the first wave. When the fighters' fuel got low they were to refuel at the aircraft carriers and return to combat. Fighters were to serve CAP duties where needed, especially over U.S. airfields.
Before the attack commenced, two reconnaissance aircraft launched from cruisers Chikuma and Tone were sent to scout over Oahu and Maui and report on U.S. fleet composition and location. Reconnaissance aircraft flights risked alerting the U.S.,[57] and were not necessary. U.S. fleet composition and preparedness information in Pearl Harbor was already known due to the reports of the Japanese spy Takeo Yoshikawa. A report of the absence of the U.S. fleet in Lahaina anchorage off Maui was received from the fleet submarine I-72.[58] Another four scout planes patrolled the area between the Japanese carrier force (the Kido Butai) and Niihau, to detect any counterattack.[59]

Submarines

Fleet submarines I-16, I-18, I-20, I-22, and I-24 each embarked a Type A midget submarine for transport to the waters off Oahu.[60] The five I-boats left Kure Naval District on November 25, 1941.[61] On December 6, they came to within 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) of the mouth of Pearl Harbor[62] and launched their midget subs at about 01:00 on December 7.[63] At 03:42[64] Hawaiian Time, the minesweeper Condor spotted a midget submarine periscope southwest of the Pearl Harbor entrance buoy and alerted the destroyer Ward.[65] The midget may have entered Pearl Harbor. However, Ward sank another midget submarine at 06:37[65][nb 11] in the first American shots in the Pacific Theater. A midget submarine on the north side of Ford Island missed the seaplane tender Curtiss with her first torpedo and missed the attacking destroyer Monaghan with her other one before being sunk by Monaghan at 08:43.[65]

A third midget submarine, the Ha-19, grounded twice, once outside the harbor entrance and again on the east side of Oahu, where it was captured on December 8.[67] Ensign Kazuo Sakamaki swam ashore and was captured by Hawaii National Guard Corporal David Akui, becoming the first Japanese prisoner of war.[nb 12] A fourth had been damaged by a depth charge attack and was abandoned by its crew before it could fire its torpedoes.[68] Japanese forces received a radio message from a midget submarine at 00:41 on December 8 claiming damage to one or more large war vessels inside Pearl Harbor.[69] The fifth midget submarine was found in three parts in 1992, 2000 and 2001 by Hawaii Undersea Research Laboratory's submarines outside Pearl Harbor within U.S. amphibious warfare debris field. Both torpedoes were missing and their fate correlates to the reports of firing two torpedoes at light cruiser St. Louis at 10:04 at Pearl Harbor entrance and possible torpedo firing at destroyer Helm at 08:21.[70]

Japanese declaration of war

The attack took place before any formal declaration of war was made by Japan, but this was not Admiral Yamamoto's intention. He originally stipulated that the attack should not commence until thirty minutes after Japan had informed the United States that peace negotiations were at an end. The Japanese tried to uphold the conventions of war while still achieving surprise, but the attack began before the notice could be delivered. Tokyo transmitted the 5,000-word notification (commonly called the "14-Part Message") in two blocks to the Japanese Embassy in Washington, but transcribing the message took too long for the Japanese ambassador to deliver it in time. (In fact, U.S. code breakers had already deciphered and translated most of the message hours before he was scheduled to deliver it.)[71] The final part of the "14 Part Message" is sometimes described as a declaration of war. While it neither declared war nor severed diplomatic relations, it was viewed by a number of senior U.S government and military officials as a very strong indicator that negotiations were likely to be terminated[72] and that war might break out at any moment.[73] A declaration of war was printed on the front page of Japan's newspapers in the evening edition of December 8,[74] but not delivered to the U.S. government until the day after the attack.

For decades, conventional wisdom held that Japan attacked without any official warning of a break in relations only because of accidents and bumbling that delayed the delivery of a document hinting at war to Washington. In 1999, however, Takeo Iguchi, a professor of law and international relations at International Christian University in Tokyo, discovered documents that pointed to a vigorous debate inside the government over how, and indeed whether, to notify Washington of Japan's intention to break off negotiations and start a war, including a December 7 entry in the war diary saying, "our deceptive diplomacy is steadily proceeding toward success." Of this, Iguchi said, "The diary shows that the army and navy did not want to give any proper declaration of war, or indeed prior notice even of the termination of negotiations ... and they clearly prevailed."[75][76]

First wave composition


The Japanese attacked in two waves. The first wave was detected by U.S. Army radar at 136 nautical miles (252 km), but was misidentified as USAAF bombers arriving from the American mainland
Top:
A. Ford Island NAS B. Hickam Field C. Bellows Field D. Wheeler Field
E. Kaneohe NAS F. Ewa MCAS R-1. Opana Radar Station R-2. Kawailoa RS R-3. Kaaawa RS
G. Haleiwa H. Kahuku I. Wahiawa J. Kaneohe K. Honolulu
0. B-17s from mainland 1. First strike group 1-1. Level bombers 1-2. Torpedo bombers 1-3. Dive bombers 2. Second strike group 2-1. Level bombers 2-1F. Fighters 2-2. Dive bombers
Bottom:
A. Wake Island B. Midway Islands C. Johnston Island D. Hawaii
D-1. Oahu 1. USS Lexington 2. USS Enterprise 3. First Air Fleet

  <21 feet (6.4 m)
  22–23 feet (6.7–7.0 m)
  29 feet (8.8 m)
  30–32 feet (9.1–9.8 m)
  33–34 feet (10.1–10.4 m)
  34–35 feet (10.4–10.7 m)
  36–37 feet (11.0–11.3 m)
  38–39 feet (11.6–11.9 m)
  40–41 feet (12.2–12.5 m)
  42–48 feet (12.8–14.6 m)
  >49 feet (14.9 m)
  City
  Army base
  Navy base
Attacked targets:
1: USS California
2: USS Maryland
3: USS Oklahoma
4: USS Tennessee
5: USS West Virginia
6: USS Arizona
7: USS Nevada
8: USS Pennsylvania
9: Ford Island NAS
10: Hickam field
Ignored infrastructure targets:
A: Oil storage tanks
B: CINCPAC headquarters building
C: Submarine base
D: Navy Yard
The first attack wave of 183 planes was launched north of Oahu, led by Commander Mitsuo Fuchida.[77] Six planes failed to launch due to technical difficulties.[59] It included:[nb 13]

1st Group (targets: battleships and aircraft carriers)[79]
49 Nakajima B5N Kate bombers armed with 800 kg (1760 lb) armor piercing bombs, organized in four sections (1 failed to launch)
40 B5N bombers armed with Type 91 torpedoes, also in four sections
2nd Group – (targets: Ford Island and Wheeler Field)
51 Aichi D3A Val dive bombers armed with 550 lb (249 kg) general purpose bombs (3 failed to launch)
3rd Group – (targets: aircraft at Ford Island, Hickam Field, Wheeler Field, Barber's Point, Kaneohe)
43 Mitsubishi A6M "Zero" fighters for air control and strafing[78] (2 failed to launch)
As the first wave approached Oahu, it was detected by the U.S. Army SCR-270 radar at Opana Point near the island's northern tip. This post had been in training mode for months, but was not yet operational.[80] Although the operators, Privates George Elliot Jr. and Joseph Lockard,[81] reported a target, a newly assigned officer at the thinly manned Intercept Center, Lieutenant Kermit A. Tyler, presumed it was the scheduled arrival of six B-17 bombers. The direction from which the aircraft were coming was close (only a few degrees separated the two inbound courses),[82] while the operators had never seen a formation as large on radar;[83] they neglected to tell Tyler of its size,[84] while Tyler, for security reasons, could not tell them the B-17s were due[84] (even though it was widely known).[84]

As the first wave planes approached Oahu, they encountered and shot down several U.S. aircraft. At least one of these radioed a somewhat incoherent warning. Other warnings from ships off the harbor entrance were still being processed or awaiting confirmation when the attacking planes began bombing and strafing. Nevertheless, it is not clear any warnings would have had much effect even if they had been interpreted correctly and much more promptly. The results the Japanese achieved in the Philippines were essentially the same as at Pearl Harbor, though MacArthur had almost nine hours warning that the Japanese had already attacked Pearl Harbor.

The air portion of the attack began at 7:48 a.m. Hawaiian Time[13] (3:18 a.m. December 8 Japanese Standard Time, as kept by ships of the Kido Butai),[85][nb 14] with the attack on Kaneohe. A total of 353[14] Japanese planes in two waves reached Oahu. Slow, vulnerable torpedo bombers led the first wave, exploiting the first moments of surprise to attack the most important ships present (the battleships), while dive bombers attacked U.S. air bases across Oahu, starting with Hickam Field, the largest, and Wheeler Field, the main U.S. Army Air Forces fighter base. The 171 planes in the second wave attacked the Army Air Forces' Bellows Field near Kaneohe on the windward side of the island, and Ford Island. The only aerial opposition came from a handful of P-36 Hawks, P-40 Warhawks, and some SBD Dauntless dive bombers from the carrier USS Enterprise.[nb 15]


A destroyed Vindicator at Ewa field, the victim of one of the smaller attacks on the approach to Pearl Harbor.
Men aboard U.S. ships awoke to the sounds of alarms, bombs exploding, and gunfire, prompting bleary-eyed men to dress as they ran to General Quarters stations. (The famous message, "Air raid Pearl Harbor. This is not drill.",[nb 16] was sent from the headquarters of Patrol Wing Two, the first senior Hawaiian command to respond.) The defenders were very unprepared. Ammunition lockers were locked, aircraft parked wingtip to wingtip in the open to deter sabotage,[86] guns unmanned (none of the Navy's 5"/38s, only a quarter of its machine guns, and only four of 31 Army batteries got in action).[86] Despite this low alert status, many American military personnel responded effectively during the attack.[nb 17] Ensign Joe Taussig Jr., aboard USS Nevada, commanded the ship's antiaircraft guns and was severely wounded, but continued to be on post. Lt. Commander F.J. Thomas commanded USS Nevada in the captain's absence and got her under way until the ship was grounded at 9:10 a.m.[87] One of the destroyers, USS Aylwin, got underway with only four officers aboard, all ensigns, none with more than a year's sea duty; she operated at sea for 36 hours before her commanding officer managed to get back aboard.[88] Captain Mervyn Bennion, commanding USS West Virginia, led his men until he was cut down by fragments from a bomb which hit USS Tennessee, moored alongside.

Second wave composition

The second planned wave consisted of 171 planes: 54 B5Ns, 81 D3As, and 36 A6Ms, commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Shigekazu Shimazaki.[78] Four planes failed to launch because of technical difficulties.[59] This wave and its targets comprised:[78]

1st Group – 54 B5Ns armed with 550 lb (249 kg) and 132 lb (60 kg) general purpose bombs[79]
27 B5Ns – aircraft and hangars on Kaneohe, Ford Island, and Barbers Point
27 B5Ns – hangars and aircraft on Hickam Field
2nd Group (targets: aircraft carriers and cruisers)
78 D3As armed with 550 lb (249 kg) general purpose bombs, in four sections (3 aborted)
3rd Group – (targets: aircraft at Ford Island, Hickam Field, Wheeler Field, Barber's Point, Kaneohe)
35 A6Ms for defense and strafing (1 aborted)
The second wave was divided into three groups. One was tasked to attack Kāneʻohe, the rest Pearl Harbor proper. The separate sections arrived at the attack point almost simultaneously from several directions.

American casualties and damages

Ninety minutes after it began, the attack was over. 2,008 sailors were killed and 710 others wounded; 218 soldiers and airmen (who were part of the Army) were killed and 364 wounded; 109 marines were killed and 69 wounded; and 68 civilians were killed and 35 wounded. In total, 2,403 Americans died and 1,178 were wounded.[89] Eighteen ships were sunk or run aground, including five battleships.[4][5] All of the Americans killed or wounded during the attack were non-combatants, given the fact there was no state of war when the attack occurred.[23][24][90]


USS Arizona (BB-39) during the attack.
Of the American fatalities, nearly half were due to the explosion of Arizona's forward magazine after it was hit by a modified 40 cm (16 in.) shell.[nb 18]

Already damaged by a torpedo and on fire amidships, Nevada attempted to exit the harbor. She was targeted by many Japanese bombers as she got under way and sustained more hits from 250 lb (113 kg) bombs, which started further fires. She was deliberately beached to avoid blocking the harbor entrance.

California was hit by two bombs and two torpedoes. The crew might have kept her afloat, but were ordered to abandon ship just as they were raising power for the pumps. Burning oil from Arizona and West Virginia drifted down on her, and probably made the situation look worse than it was. The disarmed target ship Utah was holed twice by torpedoes. West Virginia was hit by seven torpedoes, the seventh tearing away her rudder. Oklahoma was hit by four torpedoes, the last two above her belt armor, which caused her to capsize. Maryland was hit by two of the converted 40 cm shells, but neither caused serious damage.

Although the Japanese concentrated on battleships (the largest vessels present), they did not ignore other targets. The light cruiser Helena was torpedoed, and the concussion from the blast capsized the neighboring minelayer Oglala. Two destroyers in dry dock, Cassin and Downes were destroyed when bombs penetrated their fuel bunkers. The leaking fuel caught fire; flooding the dry dock in an effort to fight fire made the burning oil rise, and both were burned out. Cassin slipped from her keel blocks and rolled against Downes. The light cruiser Raleigh was holed by a torpedo. The light cruiser Honolulu was damaged, but remained in service. The repair vessel Vestal, moored alongside Arizona, was heavily damaged and beached. The seaplane tender Curtiss was also damaged. The destroyer Shaw was badly damaged when two bombs penetrated her forward magazine.[91]


This message denotes the first U.S. ship, USS St. Louis (CL49) to clear Pearl Harbor. (National Archives and Records Administration) (Note that this is in answer to question "Is channel clear?" and faint writing at bottom concerning the answer being held until St. Louis had successfully cleared.)
Of the 402[14] American aircraft in Hawaii, 188 were destroyed and 159 damaged,[14] 155 of them on the ground. Almost none was actually ready to take off to defend the base. Eight Army Air Forces pilots managed to get airborne during the attack[92] and six were credited with downing at least one Japanese aircraft during the attack: 1st Lt. Lewis M. Sanders, 2nd Lt. Philip M. Rasmussen, 2nd Lt. Kenneth M. Taylor, 2nd Lt. George S. Welch, 2nd Lt. Harry W. Brown, and 2nd Lt. Gordon H. Sterling Jr. Sterling was shot down by Lt. Fujita over Kaneohe Bay and is listed as Body Not Recovered (not Missing In Action). Lt. John L. Dains was killed by friendly fire returning from a victory over Kaawa.[93][94] Of 33 PBYs in Hawaii, 24 were destroyed, and six others damaged beyond repair. (The three on patrol returned undamaged.) Friendly fire brought down some U.S. planes on top of that, including five from an inbound flight from Enterprise. Japanese attacks on barracks killed additional personnel.

At the time of the attack, nine civilian aircraft were flying in the vicinity of Pearl Harbor. Of these, three were shot down.[89]

Japanese losses

Fifty-five Japanese airmen and nine submariners were killed in the action, and one was captured. Of Japan's 414[78] available planes, 29 were lost during the battle[95] (nine in the first attack wave, 20 in the second),[nb 19] with another 74 damaged by antiaircraft fire from the ground.

Possible third wave

Several Japanese junior officers including Fuchida and Genda urged Nagumo to carry out a third strike in order to destroy as much of Pearl Harbor's fuel and torpedo[nb 20] storage, maintenance, and dry dock facilities as possible.[96] Genda, who had unsuccessfully advocated for invading Hawaii after the air attack, believed that without an invasion multiple strikes were necessary to disable the base as much as possible.[97] The captains of the other five carriers in the formation reported they were willing and ready to carry out a third strike.[98] Military historians have suggested the destruction of these would have hampered the U.S. Pacific Fleet far more seriously than loss of its battleships.[99] If they had been wiped out, "serious [American] operations in the Pacific would have been postponed for more than a year";[100] according to American Admiral Chester Nimitz, later Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet, "it would have prolonged the war another two years."[101] Nagumo, however, decided to withdraw for several reasons:

American anti-aircraft performance had improved considerably during the second strike, and two thirds of Japan's losses were incurred during the second wave.[102] Nagumo felt if he launched a third strike, he would be risking three quarters of the Combined Fleet's strength to wipe out the remaining targets (which included the facilities) while suffering higher aircraft losses.[102]
The location of the American carriers remained unknown. In addition, the admiral was concerned his force was now within range of American land-based bombers.[102] Nagumo was uncertain whether the U.S. had enough surviving planes remaining on Hawaii to launch an attack against his carriers.[103]
A third wave would have required substantial preparation and turnaround time, and would have meant returning planes would have had to land at night. At the time, only the (British) Royal Navy had developed night carrier techniques, so this was a substantial risk.[104]
Weather had deteriorated notably since the first and second wave launching, and rough seas complicated takeoff and landing for a third wave attack.
The task force's fuel situation did not permit him to remain in waters north of Pearl Harbor much longer, since he was at the very limit of logistical support. To do so risked running unacceptably low on fuel, perhaps even having to abandon destroyers en route home.[105]
He believed the second strike had essentially satisfied the main objective of his mission—the neutralization of the Pacific Fleet—and did not wish to risk further losses.[106] Moreover, it was Japanese Navy practice to prefer the conservation of strength over the total destruction of the enemy.[107]
At a conference aboard Yamato the following morning, Yamamoto initially supported Nagumo.[106] In retrospect, sparing the vital dockyards, maintenance shops, and oil depots meant the U.S. could respond relatively quickly to Japanese activities in the Pacific. Yamamoto later regretted Nagumo's decision to withdraw and categorically stated it had been a great mistake not to order a third strike.[108]

Photographs

The first aerial photographs of the attack on Pearl Harbor were taken by Lee Embree, who was aboard a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress en route from Hamilton Field, California, to the Philippines.[109] Lee's 38th Reconnaissance Squadron had scheduled a refueling stop at Hickam Field at the time of the attack.[109]


Crew members aboard Shokaku launching the attack.

 

A Japanese Mitsubishi A6M2 "Zero" fighter airplane of the second wave takes off from the aircraft carrier Akagi on the morning of December 7, 1941.

 

Zeroes of the second wave preparing to take off from Shokaku for Pearl Harbor.

 

A Japanese Nakajima B5N2 "Kate" torpedo bomber takes off from Shokaku.

 

Japanese Aichi D3A1 "Val" dive bombers of the second wave preparing for take off. Aircraft carrier Soryu in the background.

 
An Aichi D3A Type 99 kanbaku (dive bomber) launches from the Imperial Japanese Navy aircraft carrier Akagi to participate in the second wave during the attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.

 

Battleship USS California sinking.

 

Battleship USS Arizona explodes.

 

Destroyer USS Shaw exploding after her forward magazine was detonated.

 
Battleship USS Nevada attempting to escape from the harbor.

 

Battleship USS West Virginia took two aerial bombs, both duds, and seven torpedo hits, one of which may have come from a midget submarine.

 

A destroyed B-17 after the attack on Hickam Field.

 

Hangar on Ford Island burns

 

Aftermath: USS West Virginia (severely damaged), USS Tennessee (damaged), and the USS Arizona (sunk).

Ships lost or damaged

Battleships

Arizona (Kidd's flagship): hit by four armor-piercing bombs, exploded; total loss. 1,177 dead.
Oklahoma: hit by five torpedoes, capsized; total loss. 429 dead. Refloated November 1943; capsized and lost while under tow to the mainland May 1947.
West Virginia: hit by two bombs, seven torpedoes, sunk; returned to service July 1944. 106 dead.
California: hit by two bombs, two torpedoes, sunk; returned to service January 1944. 100 dead.
Nevada: hit by six bombs, one torpedo, beached; returned to service October 1942. 60 dead.
Tennessee: hit by two bombs; returned to service February 1942. 5 dead.
Maryland: hit by two bombs; returned to service February 1942. 4 dead (including floatplane pilot shot down).
Pennsylvania (Kimmel's flagship):[110] in drydock with Cassin and Downes, hit by one bomb, debris from USS Cassin; remained in service. 9 dead.
Ex-battleship (target/AA training ship)

Utah: hit by two torpedoes, capsized; total loss. 64 dead.
Cruisers

Helena: hit by one torpedo; returned to service January 1942. 20 dead.
Raleigh: hit by one torpedo; returned to service February 1942.
Honolulu: Near miss, light damage; remained in service.
Destroyers

Cassin: in drydock with Downes and Pennsylvania, hit by one bomb, burned; returned to service February 1944.
Downes: in drydock with Cassin and Pennsylvania, caught fire from Cassin, burned; returned to service November 1943.
Shaw: hit by three bombs; returned to service June 1942.
Auxiliaries

Oglala (minelayer): Damaged by torpedo hit on Helena, capsized; returned to service (as engine-repair ship) February 1944.
Vestal (repair ship): hit by two bombs, blast and fire from Arizona, beached; returned to service by August 1942.
Curtiss (seaplane tender): hit by one bomb, one crashed Japanese aircraft; returned to service January 1942. 19 dead.
Salvage


Captain Homer N. Wallin (center) supervises salvage operations aboard USS California, early 1942
After a systematic search for survivors, formal salvage operations began. Captain Homer N. Wallin, Material Officer for Commander, Battle Force, U.S. Pacific Fleet, was immediately ordered to lead salvage operations. "Within a short time I was relieved of all other duties and ordered to full time work as Fleet Salvage Officer".[111][nb 21]

Around Pearl Harbor, divers from the Navy (shore and tenders), the Naval Shipyard, and civilian contractors (Pacific Bridge and others) began work on the ships that could be refloated. They patched holes, cleared debris, and pumped water out of ships. Navy divers worked inside the damaged ships. Within six months, five battleships and two cruisers were patched or refloated so they could be sent to shipyards in Pearl Harbor and on the mainland for extensive repair.

Intensive salvage operations continued for another year, a total of some 20,000 man-hours under water.[113] Oklahoma, while successfully raised, was never repaired, and capsized while under tow to the mainland in 1947. Arizona and the target ship Utah were too heavily damaged for salvage, though much of their armament and equipment was removed and put to use aboard other vessels. Today, the two hulks remain where they were sunk,[114] with Arizona becoming a war memorial.

Aftermath


USS Pennsylvania, behind the wreckage of the USS Downes and USS Cassin.
In the wake of the attack, 15 Medals of Honor, 51 Navy Crosses, 53 Silver Stars, four Navy and Marine Corps Medals, one Distinguished Flying Cross, four Distinguished Service Crosses, one Distinguished Service Medal, and three Bronze Star Medals were awarded to the American servicemen who distinguished themselves in combat at Pearl Harbor.[115] Additionally, a special military award, the Pearl Harbor Commemorative Medal, was later authorized for all military veterans of the attack.

The day after the attack, Roosevelt delivered his famous Infamy Speech to a Joint Session of Congress, calling for a formal declaration of war on the Empire of Japan. Congress obliged his request less than an hour later. On December 11, Germany and Italy, honoring their commitments under the Tripartite Pact, declared war on the United States. The pact was an earlier agreement between Germany, Italy and Japan which had the principal objective of limiting U.S. intervention in any conflicts involving the three nations.[116] Congress issued a declaration of war against Germany and Italy later that same day. Britain actually declared war on Japan nine hours before the U.S. did, partially due to Japanese attacks on Malaya, Singapore and Hong Kong, and partially due to Winston Churchill's promise to declare war "within the hour" of a Japanese attack on the United States.[117]

The attack was an initial shock to all the Allies in the Pacific Theater. Further losses compounded the alarming setback. Japan attacked the Philippines hours later (because of the time difference, it was December 8 in the Philippines). Only three days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the Prince of Wales and Repulse were sunk off the coast of Malaya, causing British Prime Minister Winston Churchill later to recollect "In all the war I never received a more direct shock. As I turned and twisted in bed the full horror of the news sank in upon me. There were no British or American capital ships in the Indian Ocean or the Pacific except the American survivors of Pearl Harbor who were hastening back to California. Over this vast expanse of waters Japan was supreme and we everywhere were weak and naked".[118]

Throughout the war, Pearl Harbor was frequently used in American propaganda.[119]

One further consequence of the attack on Pearl Harbor and its aftermath (notably the Niihau Incident) was that Japanese American residents and citizens were relocated to nearby Japanese-American internment camps. Within hours of the attack, hundreds of Japanese American leaders were rounded up and brought to high-security camps such as Sand Island at the mouth of Honolulu harbor and Kilauea Military Camp on the island of Hawaii.[120][121] Later, over 110,000 Japanese Americans, including United States citizens, were removed from their homes and transferred to internment camps in California, Idaho, Utah, Arizona, Wyoming, Colorado, Arkansas, and Texas.[122][123]

The attack also had international consequences. The Canadian province of British Columbia, bordering the Pacific Ocean, had long had a large population of Japanese immigrants. Pre-war tensions were exacerbated by the Pearl Harbor attack, leading to a reaction from the Government of Canada. On February 24, 1942, Order-in-Council P.C. no. 1486 was passed under the War Measures Act allowing for the forced removal of any and all Canadians of Japanese descent from British Columbia, as well as the prohibiting from them returning to the province. The Japanese-Canadians were given a choice: either be moved into internment camps or be deported back to Japan.[124]

Niihau Incident


Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi's aircraft shown ten days after it crashed
The Japanese planners had determined that some means was required for rescuing fliers whose aircraft were too badly damaged to return to the carriers. The island of Niihau, only 30 minutes flying time from Pearl Harbor, was designated as the rescue point.

The Zero flown by Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi of Hiryu was damaged in the attack on Wheeler, so he flew to the rescue point on Niihau. The aircraft was further damaged on landing. Nishikaichi was helped from the wreckage by one of the native Hawaiians, who, aware of the tension between the United States and Japan, took the pilot's maps and other documents. The island's residents had no telephones or radio and were completely unaware of the attack on Pearl Harbor. Nishikaichi enlisted the support of three Japanese-American residents in an attempt to recover the documents. During the ensuing struggles, Nishikaichi was killed and a Hawaiian civilian was wounded; one collaborator committed suicide, and his wife and the third collaborator were sent to prison.

The ease with which the local ethnic Japanese residents had apparently gone to the assistance of Nishikaichi was a source of concern for many, and tended to support those who believed that local Japanese could not be trusted.[125]

Strategic implications

Admiral Hara Tadaichi summed up the Japanese result by saying, "We won a great tactical victory at Pearl Harbor and thereby lost the war."[126] While the attack accomplished its intended objective, it turned out to be largely unnecessary. Unbeknownst to Yamamoto, who conceived the original plan, the U.S. Navy had decided as far back as 1935 to abandon 'charging' across the Pacific towards the Philippines in response to an outbreak of war (in keeping with the evolution of Plan Orange).[30] The U.S. instead adopted "Plan Dog" in 1940, which emphasized keeping the IJN out of the eastern Pacific and away from the shipping lanes to Australia, while the U.S. concentrated on defeating Nazi Germany.[127]

Fortunately for the United States, the American aircraft carriers were untouched by the Japanese attack, otherwise the Pacific Fleet's ability to conduct offensive operations would have been crippled for a year or more (given no diversions from the Atlantic Fleet). As it was, the elimination of the battleships left the U.S. Navy with no choice but to rely on its aircraft carriers and submarines—the very weapons with which the U.S. Navy halted and eventually reversed the Japanese advance. While six of the eight battleships were repaired and returned to service, their relatively low speed and high fuel consumption limited their deployment, and they served mainly in shore bombardment roles (their only major action being the Battle of Surigao Strait). A major flaw of Japanese strategic thinking was a belief that the ultimate Pacific battle would be fought by battleships, in keeping with the doctrine of Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan. As a result, Yamamoto (and his successors) hoarded battleships for a "decisive battle" that never happened.[128]

The Japanese confidence in their ability to achieve a short, victorious war meant that they neglected Pearl Harbor's navy repair yards, oil tank farms, submarine base, and old headquarters building.[54] All of these targets were omitted from Genda's list, yet they proved more important than any battleship to the American war efforts in the Pacific. The survival of the repair shops and fuel depots allowed Pearl Harbor to maintain logistical support to the US Navy's operations,[129][130] such as the Battles of Coral Sea and Midway. It was submarines that immobilized the Imperial Japanese Navy's heavy ships and brought Japan's economy to a virtual standstill by crippling the transportation of oil and raw materials: import of raw materials was down by half what it had been at the end of 1942, "to a disastrous ten million tons", while oil import "was almost completely stopped".[nb 22] Lastly, the basement of the Old Administration Building was the home of the cryptanalytic unit which contributed significantly to the Midway ambush and the Submarine Force's success. [132]

Present day


USS Arizona to left, museum to right next to the Admiral Clarey Bridge
Today, the USS Arizona Memorial on the island of Oahu honors the lives lost on the day of the attack. Visitors to the memorial reach it via boats from the naval base at Pearl Harbor. Alfred Preis is the architect responsible for the memorial's design. The structure has a sagging center and its ends strong and vigorous. It commemorates "initial defeat and ultimate victory" of all lives lost on December 7, 1941.[133] Although December 7 is known as Pearl Harbor Day, it is not considered a federal holiday in the United States. The nation does however, continue to pay homage remembering the thousands injured and killed when attacked by the Japanese in 1941. Schools and other establishments in some places around the country lower the American flag to half-staff out of respect.[134]


Pearl Harbor survivor Bill Johnson reads the list of names inscribed in the USS Arizona Memorial.
Media


FDR Pearl Harbor speech
MENU0:00
Speech given before Joint Session of Congress in entirety. (3.1 MB, ogg/Vorbis format).
Read full text on Wikisource
"A date which will live in infamy"
MENU0:00
Section of Pearl Harbor speech with famous phrase. (168 KB, ogg/Vorbis format).
Problems playing these files? See media help.
Films set at or around the bombing of Pearl Harbor include:

Remember Pearl Harbor (1942) A Republic Pictures B-movie, starring Don "Red" Barry, one of the first motion pictures to respond to the events.[135]
Air Force, a 1943 propaganda film depicting the fate of the crew of the Mary-Ann, one of the B-17 Flying Fortress bombers that fly into Hickam Field during the attack.
December 7th, directed by John Ford for the U.S. Navy in 1943, is a film that recreates the attacks of the Japanese forces. CNN mistakenly ran footage of this as actual attack footage during an entertainment news report in 2003. One film historian believes two documentaries a decade earlier did also.[136]
From Here to Eternity (1953), an adaptation of the James Jones novel set in Hawaii on the eve of the attack.
In Harm's Way (1965), director Otto Preminger's adaptation of the James Bassett novel, which opens on December 6, 1941, in Hawaii, and depicts the attack from the point of view of the men of a ship able to leave the harbor.
Storm Over the Pacific, also known as Hawai Middouei daikaikusen: Taiheiyo no arashi (Hawaii-Midway Battle of the Sea and Sky: Storm in the Pacific Ocean) and I Bombed Pearl Harbor (1961), produced by the Japanese studio Toho Company and starring Toshiro Mifune, tells the story of Japanese airmen who served in the Pearl Harbor Raid and the Battle of Midway. An edited version dubbed into English as I Bombed Pearl Harbor was given U.S. release in 1961.[135]
Tora! Tora! Tora! (1970), a Japan-U.S. coproduction about the attack is "meticulous"[137] in its approach to dissecting the situation leading up to the bombing. It depicts the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor from both American and Japanese points of view, with scrupulous attention to historical fact, including the U.S. use of Magic cryptanalysis.
Pearl (1978), a TV miniseries, written by Stirling Silliphant, about events leading up to the attack.
1941 (1979), director Steven Spielberg comedy about a panicked Los Angeles immediately after the attack.
The Final Countdown (1980), in which the nuclear aircraft carrier, USS Nimitz travels through time to one day before the attack.
The Winds of War, a novel by American writer Herman Wouk, was written between 1963 and 1971. The novel finishes in December 1941 with the aftermath of the attack. The TV miniseries based on the book was produced by Dan Curtis, airing in 1984. It starred Robert Mitchum and Ali MacGraw, with Ralph Bellamy as President Roosevelt.
Pearl Harbor (2001), directed by Michael Bay, a love story set amidst the lead up to the attack and its aftermath.
Non-fiction/historical

The Attack on Pearl Harbor: An Illustrated History by Larry Kimmett and Margaret Regis is a careful recreation of the "Day of Infamy" using maps, photos, unique illustrations, and an animated CD. From the early stages of Japanese planning, through the attack on Battleship Row, to the salvage of the U.S. Pacific fleet, this book provides a detailed overview of the attack.
At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor by Gordon W. Prange is an extremely comprehensive account of the events leading up to the Pearl Harbor attack and is considered by most scholars to be the best single work about the raid. It is a balanced account that gives both the Japanese and American perspectives. Prange spent 37 years researching the book by studying documents about Pearl Harbor and interviewing surviving participants to attempt the most exhaustive account of what happened: the Japanese planning and execution, why US intelligence failed to warn of it, and why a peace agreement was not attained. The book is the first in the so-called "Prange Trilogy" of Pearl Harbor books co-written with Donald Goldstein and Katherine Dillon, the other two being:
Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History – a dissection of the various revisionist theories surrounding the attack.
December 7, 1941: The Day The Japanese Attacked Pearl Harbor – a recollection of the attack as narrated by eyewitnesses.
Day of Infamy by Walter Lord was one of the most popular nonfiction accounts of the attack on Pearl Harbor.[138]
Pearl Harbor: Final Judgment by Henry C. Clausen and Bruce Lee tells of Clausen's top-secret investigation of the events leading up to the Pearl Harbor attack. Much of the information in this book was still classified when previous books were published.
Pearl Harbor Countdown: Admiral James O. Richardson by Skipper Steely is an insightful and detailed account of the events leading up to the attack. Through his comprehensive treatment of the life and times of Admiral James O. Richardson, Steely explores four decades of American foreign policy, traditional military practice, U.S. intelligence, and the administrative side of the military, exposing the largely untold story of the events leading up to the Japanese attack.
Pearl Harbor Papers: Inside the Japanese Plans, released by Goldstein and Dillon in 1993, used materials from Prange's library to further flesh out the Japanese perspective of the attack, including diaries from some officers and ship logs.
Pearl Harbor: The Seeds and Fruits of Infamy by Percy L. Greaves, Jr. The first part provides a detailed history of pre-war U.S.-Japan relations, documenting the sources of rising tension. The second part suggests that the attack on Pearl Harbor was neither unexpected nor unprovoked.
The Last Zero Fighter, released in 2012, uses interviews conducted in Japanese, in Japan, with five Japanese aviators, three of whom participated in the Pearl Harbor strike: Kaname Harada, Haruo Yoshino and Takeshi Maeda. The aviators share their personal experiences (translated into English) in regards to their personal experiences training for and executing the raid on Pearl Harbor.[139]
Alternate history

Days of Infamy is a novel by Harry Turtledove in which the Japanese attack on Hawaii is not limited to a strike on Pearl Harbor, but is instead a full-scale invasion and eventual occupation after U.S. forces are driven off the islands (something one of the key planners of the attack, Commander Minoru Genda, wanted but the senior officers realized was impossible).[140] The many viewpoint characters (a Turtledove trademark) are drawn from Hawaiian civilians (both white and Japanese) as well as soldiers and sailors from both Japan and the USA. Turtledove has to date written one sequel, The End of the Beginning.
The airstrike and Hawaii-invasion premise of Days of Infamy was earlier used in the first episode of the anime OVA series Konpeki no Kantai. In the episode, Japan carries out the attack in the early hours of the morning, having perfected night carrier operations. The raid begins with a flare drop by pathfinders. The entire base (including the repair facilities) and a number of supply ships in the harbor are destroyed by daybreak. As for the main body of the Pacific Fleet, the Combined Fleet regroups and annihilates them while they return to Pearl Harbor. The episode, which is divided into three stages in the series' game version, ends with Japanese troops landing at all islands in Hawaii.
William Sanders wrote the alternate history story "Billy Mitchell's Overt Act".[141] In the variant history depicted in the story, Billy Mitchell managed to avoid the court-martial which ended his military career in actual history and was still alive and still an active service general in 1941. Being stationed in Hawaii he correctly guessed the Japanese intentions, launched a preemptive strike on the oncoming Japanese carriers, and at the cost of his own life destroyed several of them and disabled others, preventing the Japanese attack. However, the political result was that - the US having struck the first blow rather than being attacked - the American public was not united in support of the war against Japan, became increasingly discontented with the price, and the war ended with an indecisive peace rather than a complete American victory.
See also

Battle of Taranto
Operation K
Air warfare of World War II
Attack on Howland Island
List of United States Navy ships present at Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941
Nagai Kita
National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day
Pearl Harbor Survivors Association
Pearl Harbor advance-knowledge conspiracy theory
Winds Code
Notes

Jump up ^ USCGC Taney (WHEC-37)
Jump up ^ Utah and Oglala
Jump up ^ Unless otherwise stated, all vessels listed were salvageable.[2]
Jump up ^ Also known as the Battle of Pearl Harbor,[9] the Hawaii Operation or Operation AI by the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters,[10][11] and Operation Z during planning.[12]
Jump up ^ USS Utah (AG-16, formerly BB-31); the Utah was moored in the space intended to have been occupied by the carrier Enterprise which, returning with a task force, had been expected to enter the channel at 0730 on 7 December. Strong headwinds delayed the refueling of the destroyers, and the task force did not reach Pearl Harbor until dusk the following day.[15]
Jump up ^ Gordon Prange specifically addresses some revisionist works, including "Charles A. Beard. President Roosevelt and the Coming War 1941; William Henry Chamberlain, America's Second Crusade; John T. Flynn, The Roosevelt Myth; George Morgenstern, Pearl Harbor; Frederic R. Sanborn, Design for War; Robert A. Theobald, The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor; Harry E. Barnes, ed., Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace and The Court Historians versus Revisionism; Husband E. Kimmel, Admiral Kimmel's Story."[22]
Jump up ^ After it was announced in September iron and steel scrap export would also be prohibited, Japanese Ambassador Horinouchi protested to Secretary Hull on October 8, 1940 warning this might be considered an "unfriendly act".[27]
Jump up ^ This was mainly a Japanese Navy preference; the Japanese Army would have chosen to attack the Soviet Union.[34]
Jump up ^ "The Dorn report did not state with certainty that Kimmel and Short knew about Taranto. There is, however, no doubt that they did know, as did the Japanese. Lt. Cdr. Takeshi Naito, the assistant naval attaché to Berlin, flew to Taranto to investigate the attack first hand, and Naito subsequently had a lengthy conversation with Cdr. Mitsuo Fuchida about his observations. Fuchida led the Japanese attack on 7 December 1941."[42]
Jump up ^ "A torpedo bomber needed a long, level flight, and when released, its conventional torpedo would plunge nearly a hundred feet deep before swerving upward to strike a hull. Pearl Harbor deep averages 42 feet. But the Japanese borrowed an idea from the British carrier-based torpedo raid on the Italian naval base of Taranto. They fashioned auxiliary wooden tail fins to keep the torpedoes horizontal, so they would dive to only 35 feet, and they added a breakaway "nosecone" of soft wood to cushion the impact with the surface of the water."[43]
Jump up ^ She was located by a University of Hawaii research submersible on August 28, 2002 in 400 m (1,300 ft) of water, 6 nmi (11 km) outside the harbor.[66]
Jump up ^ While the nine sailors who died in the attack were quickly lionized by the Japanese government as Kyūgunshin ("The Nine War Heroes"), the news of Sakamaki's capture, which had been publicized in US news broadcasts, was kept secret. Even after the war, however, he received recriminating correspondence from those who despised him for not sacrificing his own life.
Jump up ^ The Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor, Planning and Execution. First wave: 189 planes, 50 Kates w/bombs, 40 Kates with torpedoes, 54 Vals, 45 Zekes Second wave: 171 planes, 54 Kates w/bombs, 81 Vals, 36 Zekes. The Combat Air Patrol over the carriers alternated 18 plane shifts every two hours, with 18 more ready for takeoff on the flight decks and an additional 18 ready on hangar decks.[78]
Jump up ^ In 1941, Hawaii was a half hour different from the majority of other time zones. See UTC−10:30.
Jump up ^ In the twenty-five sorties flown, USAF Historical Study No.85 credits six pilots with ten planes destroyed: 1st Lt Lewis M. Sanders (P-36) and 2nd Lts Philip M Rasmussen (P-36), Gordon H. Sterling Jr. (P-36, killed in action), Harry W. Brown (P-36), Kenneth M. Taylor (P-40, 2), and George S. Welch (P-40, 4). Three of the P-36 kills were not verified by the Japanese and may have been shot down by naval anti-aircraft fire.
Jump up ^ Odd though it may sound, "not" is correct, in keeping with standard Navy telegraphic practice. This was confirmed by Beloite and Beloite after years of research and debate.
Jump up ^ The gunners that did get in action scored most of the victories against Japanese aircraft that morning, including the first of the attack by Tautog, and Dorie Miller's Navy Cross-worthy effort. Miller was an African-American cook aboard West Virginia who took over an unattended anti-aircraft gun on which he had no training. He was the first African-American sailor to be awarded the Navy Cross.
Jump up ^ The wreck has become a memorial to those lost that day, most of whom remain within the ship. She continues to leak small amounts of fuel oil, over 70 years after the attack.
Jump up ^ USAAF pilots of the 46th and 47th Pursuit Squadrons, 15th Pursuit Group, claim to have destroyed 10.
Jump up ^ In the event, loss of these might have been a net benefit to the U.S. Blair, passim.
Jump up ^ Commander Edward Ellsberg was ordered to Massawa as his replacement, to assist the British in clearing scuttled Italian and German ships. This arguably delayed by several months British hopes for a useful port on the Red Sea. Commander Edward Ellsberg, O.B.E.[112]
Jump up ^ In less than eleven months, most of Japan's elite naval aviators who had been at Pearl Harbor were lost in subsequent battles. Lack of fuel and an inflexible training policy meant that they could not be replaced.[131]
References

Jump up ^ "Ships present at Pearl Harbor 0800 December 7, 1941 US Navy Historical Center". History.navy.mil. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 2011-07-17.
Jump up ^ CinCP report of damage to ships in Pearl Harbor from www.ibiblio.org/hyperwar.
^ Jump up to: a b "Overview of The Pearl Harbor Attack, 7 December 1941". Retrieved 5 October 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b c Conn 2000, p. 194
^ Jump up to: a b GPO 1946, pp. 64–65
Jump up ^ Gilbert 2009, p. 272.
Jump up ^ Gailey 1995
Jump up ^ "Pearl Harbor Casualty List". USSWestVirginia.org. Retrieved 2012-12-07.
Jump up ^ Morison 2001, pp. 101, 120, 250
Jump up ^ Prange, Gordon W., Goldstein, Donald, & Dillon, Katherine. The Pearl Harbor Papers (Brassey's, 2000), p.17ff; Google Books entry on Prange et al.
Jump up ^ For the Japanese designator of Oahu. Wilford, Timothy. "Decoding Pearl Harbor", in The Northern Mariner, XII, #1 (January 2002), p.32fn81.
Jump up ^ Fukudome, Shigeru, "Hawaii Operation". United States Naval Institute, Proceedings, 81 (December 1955), pp.1315–1331
^ Jump up to: a b Prange et al. December 7, 1941, p.174.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Parillo 2006, p. 288
Jump up ^ Thomas 2007, pp. 57–59.
Jump up ^ "Pearl Harbor Facts". About. Retrieved 5 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "United States declares war". Abilene Reporter-News. 8 December 1941. p. 1. Retrieved 12 August 2014 – via Newspapers.com. open access publication - free to read
Jump up ^ Adler, Selig. The Isolationist Impulse: Its Twentieth Century Reaction. New York: The Free Press, 1957 p. 239–258.
Jump up ^ Design For War: A Study of Secret Power Politics 1937–1941, Frederic R. Sanborn, Devin-Adair Company, New York, NY 1951.
Jump up ^ Back Door to War: The Roosevelt Foreign Policy, 1933–1941, Charles C. Tansill, Henry Regnery Company, Chicago, IL, 1952.
Jump up ^ Stevenson, Richard W. "New Light Shed on Churchill and Pearl Harbor". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 March 2014.
Jump up ^ Prange, Gordon W.; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1991). At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor. New York: Penguin Books. p. 867. ISBN 9780140157345.
^ Jump up to: a b Yuma Totani (April 1, 2009). The Tokyo War Crimes Trial: The Pursuit of Justice in the Wake of World War II. Harvard University Asia Center. p. 57.
^ Jump up to: a b Stephen C. McCaffrey (September 22, 2004). Understanding International Law. AuthorHouse. pp. 210–229.
Jump up ^ Barnhart 1987.
Jump up ^ Werner Gruhl (2007). Imperial Japan's World War Two, 1931–1945. Transaction Publishers. p.39. ISBN 978-0-7658-0352-8
Jump up ^ GPO 1943, p. 96
Jump up ^ GPO 1943, p. 94
Jump up ^ Toland, Japan's War.
^ Jump up to: a b Peattie 1997
Jump up ^ William Chalek (2002), "8. War Plan Orange", Guest of the Emperor, iUniverse, pp. 45–52, ISBN 978-0-595-23996-2
Jump up ^ Edward S. Miller (2007), War Plan Orange: The U.S. Strategy to Defeat Japan, 1897–1945, Naval Institute Press, pp. 63, ISBN 978-1-59114-500-4
Jump up ^ GPO 1943, p. 125
Jump up ^ Peattie 1997; Coox, Kobun.
Jump up ^ Chapter IV The Showdown With Japan August-December 1941 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942
Jump up ^ Chapter IV: The Fatal Turn Morton, Louis. Strategy and Command: The First Two Years
Jump up ^ Review of the Diplomatic Conversations REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE INVESTIGATION OF THE PEARL HARBOR ATTACK (1946)
^ Jump up to: a b Chapter V: The Decision for War Morton, Louis. Strategy and Command: The First Two Years
Jump up ^ Gailey 1995, p. 68
Jump up ^ Gailey 1995, p. 70
Jump up ^ Lord, Walter (2012). Day of Infamy. Open Road Media. p. 14. ISBN 1-4532-3842-5.
Jump up ^ Borch & Martinez 2005, pp. 53–54.
Jump up ^ Hellions of the Deep: The Development of American Torpedoes in World War II. By Robert Gannon, Published by Penn State Press, 1996, page 49.ISBN 0-271-01508-X
Jump up ^ Wetzler 1998, p. 39.
Jump up ^ Bix 2000, p. 417, citing the Sugiyama memo
Jump up ^ The Canadian Institute of Public Opinion (1941-12-08). "Gallup Poll Found 52p.c. of Americans Expected War". Ottawa Citizen. p. 1. Retrieved November 28, 2011.
Jump up ^ Noted by Arthur MacArthur in the 1890s. Manchester, William. American Caesar
Jump up ^ Peattie & Evans, Kaigun
Jump up ^ Prange, Gordon W.; Donald M. Goldstein; Katherinve V. Dillon (1991). Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0140159097.
Jump up ^ Prados, John (1995). Combined Fleet Decoded: The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. pp. 161–177. ISBN 1-55750-431-8.
Jump up ^ Budiansky, Stephen (2002). Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking in World War II. Free Press. ISBN 978-0743217347.
^ Jump up to: a b Willmott 1983, p. 14.
Jump up ^ Fukudome, Shigeru. Shikan: Shinjuwan Kogeki (Tokyo, 1955), p.150.
^ Jump up to: a b Willmott 1983
Jump up ^ Zimm 2011, p. 132
Jump up ^ Peattie 2001 p. 145.
Jump up ^ Zimm 2011, pp. 173,174
Jump up ^ Zimm 2011, p. 153
^ Jump up to: a b c Tony DiGiulian. "Order of Battle – Pearl Harbor – December 7, 1941". Navweaps.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2011. Retrieved 2011-07-17.
Jump up ^ Stewart, A.J., Lieutenant Commander, USN. "Those Mysterious Midgets", United States Naval Institute Proceedings, December 1974, p.56
Jump up ^ Stewart, p.56
Jump up ^ Goldstein 2000, p. 146
Jump up ^ Stewart, "Those Mysterious Midgets", p.57
Jump up ^ Smith 1999, p. 36
^ Jump up to: a b c Stewart, "Those Mysterious Midgets", p.58
Jump up ^ "Japanese Midget Submarine". Retrieved 2014-01-20.
Jump up ^ Stewart, pp.59–61
Jump up ^ Stewart, "Those Mysterious Midgets", p.61–2
Jump up ^ Ofstie, R.A., Rear Admiral, USN. The Campaigns of the Pacific War (United States Government Printing Office, 1946), p.19
Jump up ^ Zimm 2011, pp. 330–341
Jump up ^ Toland, Infamy
Jump up ^ At Dawn We Slept Prange, Goldstein. Dillon - page 424 & page 475
Jump up ^ At Dawn We Slept, Prange, Goldstein. Dillon – page 493–494
Jump up ^ Declaration of War handout Retrieved August 9, 2012.
Jump up ^ Howard W. French (December 9, 1999). "Pearl Harbor Truly a Sneak Attack, Papers Show". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Kawabata, Tai, "Historian seeks to clear embassy of Pearl Harbor ‘sneak attack’ infamy", Japan Times, 10 December 2014, P. 3
Jump up ^ Shinsato, Douglas and Tadanori Urabe, For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor, Chapters 19 and 20, eXperience, inc., Kamuela, Hawaii, 2011. ISBN 978-0-9846745-0-3
^ Jump up to: a b c d e "Aircraft Attack Organization". Ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 2011-07-17.
^ Jump up to: a b NavSource 2003
Jump up ^ Prange, Goldstein, Dillon. At Dawn We Slept. pages 730–31 'Short mishandled radar ...' In his (Short's) words '... more for training than any idea it would be real'
Jump up ^ The American Century, Harold Evans,Jonathan Cape, London,1998 p.309
Jump up ^ Prange 1999, p. 98
Jump up ^ Prange et al., At Dawn We Slept, p.500.
^ Jump up to: a b c Prange et al., At Dawn We Slept, p.501.
Jump up ^ Symonds, Craig L. The Battle Of Midway, (Oxford University Press, 2011), p.218.
^ Jump up to: a b Parillo 2006, p. 293
Jump up ^ Final Voyages, by Kermit Bonner. p.105
Jump up ^ Aylwin, Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships.
^ Jump up to: a b Patrick Watson (Dec 1, 2007). Watson's Really Big WWII Almanac, Volume 2: July to December. Xlibris Corporation. p. 592.
Jump up ^ Dennis W. Shepherd (September 22, 2004). Returning Son: From Baghdad, Kentucky to Baghdad, Iraq (and back). AuthorHouse. p. 57.
Jump up ^ USS Shaw (DD-373)
Jump up ^ Dorr, Robert F.; Fred L. Borch. "Pyjama-clad pilot took on Japanese at Pearl Harbor". Army Times. United States Army. Retrieved 12 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "HyperWar: 7 December 1941: The Air Force Story [Chapter 4]". Ibiblio.org. Retrieved 2013-07-10.
Jump up ^ Potter, Lt Col Joseph V. (Winter 1982). "A Handful of Pilots". JOURNAL. American Aviation Historical Society. pp. 282–285. Retrieved 12 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Ofstie 1946, p. 18
Jump up ^ Gailey 1997, p. 68
Jump up ^ Caravaggio, Angelo N. (Winter 2014). ""Winning" the Pacific War". Naval War College Review 67 (1): 85–118.
Jump up ^ Steve Horn, The Second Attack on Pearl Harbor: Operation K and Other Japanese Attempts to Bomb America in World War II, 2005, (Naval Institute Press), p. 16
Jump up ^ Willmott 1983; Blair, Silent Victory.
Jump up ^ Gailey 1997, pp. 97–98
Jump up ^ Yergin, Daniel (1991), The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money & Power, New York: Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-671-79932-0 p. 327
^ Jump up to: a b c Hoyt 2000, p. 190
Jump up ^ Hoyt 2000, p. 191
Jump up ^ Stephen, Martin; Grove, Eric (Ed) (1988), Sea Battles in Close-up: World War 2, Volume 1, Shepperton, Surrey: Ian Allan, pp. 34–38, ISBN 0-7110-1596-1
Jump up ^ Prange 1999
^ Jump up to: a b Gailey 1997, p. 97
Jump up ^ Willmott 1983, p. 16.
Jump up ^ Gailey 1997, p. 98
^ Jump up to: a b Casey, Jim (2008-01-24). "Lee Embree, first photographer to fly into 1941 Pearl Harbor attack, dies in Port Angeles". Peninsula Daily News. Retrieved 2011-02-01.
Jump up ^ Prange, Goldstein, Dillon. At Dawn We Slept page 49
Jump up ^ Pearl Harbor: Why, How Fleet Salvage & Final Appraisal, Wallin, Homer Naval History Division 1968
Jump up ^ Under the Red Sea Sun (Dodd, Mead, and Co., 1946).
Jump up ^ Raymer, E.C: "Descent Into Darkness", Presidio Press, 1996.
Jump up ^ "Post-attack ship salvage 1942–1944". Web.archive.org. 2009-10-27. Archived from the original on 2009-10-27. Retrieved 2011-07-17.
Jump up ^ Smith 1999, p. .
Jump up ^ History of the Second World War, Liddell Hart, B.H. page 206
Jump up ^ "The U.S. At War, The Last Stage". Time. December 15, 1941.
Jump up ^ Churchill, Winston; Martin Gilbert (2001), "December 1941", The Churchill War Papers: The Ever-Widening War, Volume 3: 1941, London, New York: W.W. Norton, pp. 1593–1594, ISBN 0-393-01959-4
Jump up ^ Anthony Rhodes, Propaganda: The art of persuasion: World War II, p257 1976, Chelsea House Publishers, New York
Jump up ^ "World War II Internment in Hawai'i". Education through Cultural & Historical Organizations. Retrieved November 13, 2011.
Jump up ^ Levine, E. (1995). A Fence Away from Freedom: Japanese Americans and World War II. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.
Jump up ^ [1] Pearl Harbor Oahu website, retrieved on November 12, 2011.
Jump up ^ Daniels, R. (1972). Concentration camps USA: Japanese Americans and World War II. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Jump up ^ La Violette, Forrest E. (1948). The Canadian Japanese and World War II. Toronto, Ontario: University of Toronto Press. pp. 59–60.
Jump up ^ Douglas Shinsato, Translator/Publisher of For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor, 2011, pages 293–294
Jump up ^ Haufler, Herve. Codebreaker's Victory: How the Allied Cryptographers Won World War II (New York: NAL, 2003), quoted p.127.
Jump up ^ Hakim 1995
Jump up ^ Willmott 1983, War Plan Orange
Jump up ^ "Attack on Pearl Harbor | Nihon Kaigun". Combinedfleet.com. Retrieved 2014-03-06.
Jump up ^ "Pearl Harbor vet remembers Dec. 7, 1941, sneak attack". Kalona News. 2013-04-17. Retrieved 2014-03-06.
Jump up ^ Peattie 1997; Coox, Kobun.
Jump up ^ Blair, pp.360 & 816.
Jump up ^ [2] Glencoe Online website, retrieved on November 10, 2011.
Jump up ^ [3] 24SevenPost website, December 7, 2010. retrieved on November 10, 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b Lovece, Frank (December 6, 2011 online; December 7, 2011 print). "Pearl Harbor at 70: good and bad films". Newsday. p. B5. Archived from the original on December 7, 2011. Check date values in: |date= (help) (Online version requires subscription.)
Jump up ^ "CNN's Pearl Harbor Mistake". History News Network (George Mason University website). 2001-06-10. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved 2009-03-13.
Jump up ^ Bernardelli, James, "Tora! Tora! Tora! film review", ReelViews.net
Jump up ^ Walter Lord, Day of Infamy (Henry Holt and Co., 1957. ASIN: B002A503FA; Holt Paperbacks, 60th ed. 2001, ISBN 0-8050-6803-1, ISBN 978-0-8050-6803-0)
Jump up ^ Dan King, The Last Zero Fighter (Pacific Press, 2012. ISBN 978-1468178807)
Jump up ^ John J. Stephan, Hawaii Under the Rising Sun.
Jump up ^ Among the stories in the anthology "Alternate Generals", edited by Harry Turtledove, Baen Books, 1998
Bibliography

Books
Barnhart, Michael A. (1987), Japan prepares for total war: the search for economic security, 1919–1941, Cornell University Press, ISBN 978-0-8014-1915-7
Bix, Herbert P. (2000), Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan, Diane Pub Co, ISBN 978-0-7567-5780-9
Borch, Frederic L.; Martinez, Daniel (2005), Kimmel, Short, and Pearl Harbor: the final report revealed, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 978-1-59114-090-0
Conn, Stetson; Fairchild, Byron; Engelman, Rose C. (2000), "7 – The Attack on Pearl Harbor", Guarding the United States and Its Outposts, Washington D.C.: Center of Military History United States Army
Gailey, Harry A. (1997), War in the Pacific: From Pearl Harbor to Tokyo Bay, Presidio, ISBN 0-89141-616-1
Gilbert, Martin (2009), The Second World War, Phoenix, ISBN 978-0-7538-2676-8
Goldstein, Donald M. (2000), Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V., eds., The Pearl Harbor papers: inside the Japanese plans, Brassey's, ISBN 978-1-57488-222-3
Hakim, Joy (1995), A History of US: Book 9: War, Peace, and All that Jazz, Oxford University Press, USA, ISBN 978-0-19-509514-2
Hixson, Walter L. (2003), The American Experience in World War II: The United States and the road to war in Europe, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-415-94029-0
Hoyt, Edwin P. (2000), Pearl Harbor, G. K. Hall, ISBN 0-7838-9303-5
Morison, Samuel Eliot (2001), History of United States Naval Operations in World War II: The rising sun in the Pacific, 1931 – April 1942, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-06973-0
Ofstie, Ralph, A., RADM USN, Naval Analysis Division, United States Strategic Bombing Survey (Pacific) (1946), The Campaigns of the Pacific War, United States Government Printing Office
Peattie, Mark R.; Evans, David C. (1997), Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 0-87021-192-7
Peattie, Mark R. (2001), Sunburst: The Rise of Japanese Naval Air Power, 1909–1941, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-59114-664-X
Parillo, Mark (2006), "The United States in the Pacific", in Higham, Robin; Harris, Stephen, Why Air Forces Fail: the Anatomy of Defeat, The University Press of Kentucky, ISBN 978-0-8131-2374-5
Prange, Gordon William; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1988), December 7, 1941: The Day the Japanese Attacked Pearl Harbor, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 978-0-07-050682-4
Smith, Carl (1999), Pearl Harbor 1941: The Day of Infamy; Osprey Campaign Series #62, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 1-85532-798-8
Stille, Mark E. (2011), Tora! Tora! Tora!: Pearl Harbor 1941; Osprey Raid Series #26, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 978-1-84908-509-0
Thomas, Evan (2007), Sea of Thunder: Four Commanders and the Last Great Naval Campaign 1941–1945, Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978-0-7432-5222-5
Willmott, H. P. (1983), The barrier and the javelin: Japanese and Allied Pacific strategies, February to June 1942, Naval Institute Press
Zimm, Alan D. (2011), Attack on Pearl Harbor: Strategy, Combat, Myths, Deceptions, Havertown, Pennsylvania: Casemate Publishers, ISBN 978-1-61200-010-7
U.S. government documents
"Document text", US Navy Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor, United States National Archives, Modern Military Branch, 1942, archived from the original on 13 January 2008, retrieved 2007-12-25
"Document text", Peace and War, United States Foreign Policy 1931–1941, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1943, retrieved 2007-12-08
"Damage to United States Naval Forces and Installations as a Result of the Attack", Report of the Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1946, retrieved 2007-12-08
Magazine articles
Rodgaard, John; Peter Hsu, Carroll Lucas, and Captain Andrew Biach (December 1999), "Pearl Harbor – Attack from Below", Naval History (United States Naval Institute) 13 (6) (requires subscription)
Wetzler, Peter (1998), Hirohito and war: imperial tradition and military decision making in prewar Japan, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-1925-5
Online sources
Organization of the Japanese Air Attack Units December 7, 1941, NavSource Naval History, 2003, archived from the original on 13 December 2007, retrieved 2007-12-08
USS Shaw, destroyerhistory.org, archived from the original on March 3, 2006, retrieved 2007-12-08
Homer N. Wallin, "Pearl Harbor: Why, How, Fleet Salvage and Final Appraisal", Hyperwar (ibiblio.org), retrieved 2011-10-10
Further reading

George Edward Morgenstern. Pearl Harbor: The Story of the Secret War. (The Devin-Adair Company, 1947) ISBN 978-1-299-05736-4. Conspiracy theory.
James Dorsey. "Literary Tropes, Rhetorical Looping, and the Nine Gods of War: 'Fascist Proclivities' Made Real," in The Culture of Japanese Fascism, ed. by Alan Tansman (Durham & London: Duke UP, 2009), pp 409–431. A study of Japanese wartime media representations of the submarine component of the attack on Pearl Harbor.
McCollum memo A 1940 memo from a Naval headquarters staff officer to his superiors outlining possible provocations to Japan, which might lead to war (declassified in 1994).
Gordon W. Prange, At Dawn We Slept (McGraw-Hill, 1981), Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History (McGraw-Hill, 1986), and December 7, 1941: The Day the Japanese Attacked Pearl Harbor (McGraw-Hill, 1988). This monumental trilogy, written with collaborators Donald M. Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon, is considered the authoritative work on the subject.
Larry Kimmett and Margaret Regis, The Attack on Pearl Harbor: An Illustrated History (NavPublishing, 2004). Using maps, photos, unique illustrations, and an animated CD, this book provides a detailed overview of the surprise attack that brought the United States into World War II.
Walter Lord, Day of Infamy (Henry Holt, 1957) is a very readable, and entirely anecdotal, re-telling of the day's events.
W. J. Holmes, Double-Edged Secrets: U.S. Naval Intelligence Operations in the Pacific During World War II (Naval Institute, 1979) contains some important material, such as Holmes' argument that, had the U.S. Navy been warned of the attack and put to sea, it would have likely resulted in an even greater disaster.
Michael V. Gannon, Pearl Harbor Betrayed (Henry Holt, 2001) is a recent examination of the issues surrounding the surprise of the attack.
Frederick D. Parker, Pearl Harbor Revisited: United States Navy Communications Intelligence 1924–1941 (Center for Cryptologic History, 1994) contains a detailed description of what the Navy knew from intercepted and decrypted Japan's communications prior to Pearl.
Henry C. Clausen and Bruce Lee, Pearl Harbor: Final Judgment, (HarperCollins, 2001), an account of the secret "Clausen Inquiry" undertaken late in the war by order of Congress to Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson.
Robert A. Theobald, Final Secret of Pearl Harbor (Devin-Adair Pub, 1954) ISBN 0-8159-5503-0 ISBN 0-317-65928-6 Foreword by Fleet Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr.
Albert C. Wedemeyer, Wedemeyer Reports! (Henry Holt Co, 1958) ISBN 0-89275-011-1 ISBN 0-8159-7216-4
Hamilton Fish, Tragic Deception: FDR and America's Involvement in World War II (Devin-Adair Pub, 1983) ISBN 0-8159-6917-1
John Toland, Infamy: Pearl Harbor and Its Aftermath (Berkley Reissue edition, 1986 ISBN 0-425-09040-X).
Mary Ellen Condon-Rall, "The U.S. Army Medical Department and the Attack on Pearl Harbor". (The Journal of Medical History, January 1989). PMID 11617401. This article discusses the state of medical readiness prior to the attack, and the post-attack response by medical personnel.
Robert Stinnett, Day of Deceit: The Truth About FDR and Pearl Harbor (Free Press, 1999) A study of the Freedom of Information Act documents that led Congress to direct clearance of Kimmel and Short. ISBN 0-7432-0129-9
Edward L. Beach, Jr., Scapegoats: A Defense of Kimmel and Short at Pearl Harbor ISBN 1-55750-059-2
Andrew Krepinevich, [4] PDF (186 KB) (Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments) contains a passage regarding the Yarnell attack, as well as reference citations.
Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision, (Stanford University Press: 1962). Regarded by many as the most important work in the attempt to understand the intelligence failure at Pearl Harbor. Her introduction and analysis of the concept of "noise" persists in understanding intelligence failures.
John Hughes-Wilson, Military Intelligence Blunders and Cover-Ups. Robinson, 1999 (revised 2004). Contains a brief but insightful chapter on the particular intelligence failures, and broader overview of what causes them.
Douglas T. Shinsato and Tadanori Urabe, "For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor". (eXperience: 2011) ISBN 978-0-9846745-0-3
Horn, Steve (2005), The Second Attack on Pearl Harbor: Operation K And Other Japanese Attempts to Bomb America in World War II, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-59114-388-8
Seki, Eiji. (2006). Mrs. Ferguson's Tea-Set, Japan and the Second World War: The Global Consequences Following Germany's Sinking of the SS Automedon in 1940. London: Global Oriental. ISBN 1-905246-28-5; ISBN 978-1-905246-28-1 (cloth) Published by BRILL/Global Oriental, 2006. Previously announced as Sinking of the SS Automedon and the Role of the Japanese Navy: A New Interpretation.
Daniel Madsen, Resurrection-Salvaging the Battle Fleet at Pearl Harbor. U.S. Naval Institute Press. 2003. Highly readable and thoroughly researched account of the aftermath of the attack and the salvage efforts from December 8, 1941 through early 1944.
Takeo, Iguchi, Demystifying Pearl Harbor: A New Perspective From Japan, I-House Press, 2010, ASIN: B003RJ1AZA.
Haynok, Robert J. (2009), "How the Japanese Did It", Naval History Magazine (United States Naval Institute) 23 (6)
Moorhead, John J. 1942 "Surgical Experience at Pearl Harbor", The Journal of the American Medical Association. An overview of different surgical procedures at the hospital at the scene of the event.
External links

  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pearl Harbor attack.
Navy History Heritage Command Official Overview
History.com Account With Video
About Education Account
"Remembering Pearl Harbor:The USS Arizona Memorial", a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
Hawaii War Records Depository, Archives & Manuscripts Department, University of Hawaii at Manoa Library
7 December 1941, The Air Force Story
The "Magic" Background (PDFs or readable online)
The Congressional investigation
Accounts
Guarding The United States And Its Outposts, in Guarding the United States and Its Outposts Official U.S. Army history of Pearl Harbor by the United States Army Center of Military History
War comes to Hawaii Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Monday, September 13, 1999
Media
Video of first Newsreel from December 23, 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor
Attack on Pearl Harbor 1, Nippon News, No. 82. in the official website of NHK.
Attack on Pearl Harbor 2, Nippon News, No. 84. in the official website of NHK.
Historic footage of Pearl Harbor during and immediately following attack on December 7, 1941
Historic documents
WW2DB: US Navy Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor
Second World War – USA Declaration of War on Japan.
Collection of extensive Japanese preparation military documents
Coordinates: 21°22′N 157°57′W

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attack_on_Pearl_Harbor&oldid=654047489"
Categories: Attack on Pearl Harbor1941 in Hawaii1941 in the United States
This page was last modified on 29 March 2015, at 15:49.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.